---
author: "Arcsly"
title: "The Ultimate Guide to Setting Up a Complete CS 1.6 Server: From Zero to Zombie Plague Server - Let the People Come!"
description: "Learn how to set up a Counter Strike 1.6 server on an Ubuntu Virtual Private Server (VPS) with this comprehensive guide"
tags: ["Windows", "Games", "Counter-Strike 1.6"]
date: 2021-12-11T00:00:00+0800
thumbnail: https://1.bp.blogspot.com/-a7CfYOytZAU/X-dvdiiERSI/AAAAAAAAGgc/BMoWOxVPdL8l-iOcrGzbtVHqkzbbMgwwACLcBGAsYHQ/s1366/Untitled-1-1.jpg
lastmod: 2023-08-30T23:51:00+0800
---

## Reason? and Why

If you're interested in hosting your own Counter Strike 1.6 (CS 1.6) server and allowing others to join, it's recommended to use a Virtual Private Server (VPS) for security and stability. This guide will walk you through setting up a CS 1.6 server on a Linux-based VPS using Ubuntu. We'll utilize various tools and libraries to ensure a smooth gaming experience.

## Step 1: Renting a VPS Server

So, you've decided to embark on the journey of setting up your own CS 1.6 server, complete with all the exciting mods and features. The first step on this exciting adventure is to secure a Virtual Private Server (VPS) that will become the foundation of your gaming paradise. In this part of the guide, we'll explore the process of renting a VPS server, ensuring you have the necessary resources to create an unforgettable CS 1.6 experience.

### Why Opt for a VPS Server?

Before we dive into the intricacies of VPS server rental, let's briefly touch on why a VPS is the preferred choice for hosting your CS 1.6 server. A VPS offers you a dedicated virtual environment, providing the resources and control necessary to create a seamless gaming experience. With the flexibility to choose your server's specifications and the ability to install custom software, a VPS is the perfect platform for your CS 1.6 ambitions.

### Exploring VPS Providers

To begin your journey, you'll need to choose a VPS provider that aligns with your preferences and requirements. There are several reputable options to consider, each offering different pricing plans, server locations, and features. Here are a few noteworthy providers to explore:

- **AWS Lightsail:** Amazon Web Services' (AWS) Lightsail offers an intuitive platform for launching and managing VPS instances. With a variety of pre-configured images and easy scaling options, Lightsail is an excellent choice for beginners and experienced users alike.

- **DigitalOcean:** Known for its user-friendly interface and straightforward pricing, DigitalOcean provides a range of VPS solutions tailored to different needs. Whether you're a gaming enthusiast or a developer, DigitalOcean has options to suit your requirements.

- **Google Cloud:** Google Cloud's Compute Engine offers high-performance virtual machines that can handle the demands of a CS 1.6 server. With advanced networking features and a global network of data centers, Google Cloud provides a solid foundation for your gaming server.

- **Linode:** Linode is renowned for its reliability and competitive pricing. With a focus on simplicity and performance, Linode's VPS offerings are designed to meet the needs of various projects, including game servers.

### Step 2: Logging into Your VPS Server and Preparing for CS 1.6 Domination

With your VPS server in hand, it's time to roll up your sleeves and embark on the journey of creating your CS 1.6 gaming paradise. While we won't delve into the intricacies of VPS security (we're here to focus on the gaming action!), let's kick things off by getting you logged into your server.

### Preparing for Server Access

Before we dive into the thrilling world of CS 1.6 setup, you'll need a secure way to access your VPS. This is where SSH (Secure Shell) comes into play. SSH allows you to connect to your server over a secure channel, ensuring that your actions are encrypted and protected from prying eyes.

Your VPS provider will have detailed documentation on how to access your server using SSH. This documentation will include crucial information like the server's IP address, username, and hostname. Make sure to have this information at hand before proceeding.

### Logging In with SSH

Now that you're armed with the necessary information, let's get you logged into your server using SSH. Here's how it's done:

1. **Open a Terminal:** On your local machine, open a terminal. If you're using a Windows machine, you can use tools like PuTTY or Windows Subsystem for Linux (WSL) to access SSH.

2. **SSH Command:** In the terminal, use the SSH command along with the provided IP address, username, and hostname to initiate the connection. For example:

   ```shell
   ssh root@<ip> -v
   ```

   Replace `<ip>` with the actual IP address of your VPS server. The `-v` flag adds verbosity, giving you more information about the connection process.

3. **Verify Connection:** After entering the command, you'll be prompted to verify the authenticity of the server's fingerprint. This is a security measure to ensure you're connecting to the correct server. Type `yes` to continue.

4. **Enter Password:** If this is your first time connecting, you'll be prompted to enter the password associated with the specified username (usually `root`). Note that the password won't be visible as you type it.

5. **Welcome to Your VPS:** Congratulations! If all goes well, you should now be logged into your VPS server. You'll see a command prompt indicating that you're ready to start your CS 1.6 adventure.

And there you have it! You've successfully logged into your VPS server using SSH, setting the stage for the exciting journey ahead. In the upcoming parts of this guide, we'll delve into the installation of essential tools and the step-by-step process of setting up your CS 1.6 server, complete with mods and features. Prepare to become the master of your CS 1.6 domain and let the gaming fun begin!

### Step 3: Updating, Upgrading, and Port 22 Access: Laying the Foundation

Now that you're logged into your VPS server, it's time to ensure that your system is up to date and that you have the necessary port access to maintain a seamless connection. In this segment, we'll be using the reliable Ubuntu distribution to guide us through the process. Ubuntu's stability and performance make it an excellent choice for hosting game servers.

### Up to date Your System

Before we get into the nitty-gritty of gaming, let's make sure your system is fresh and up to date. Run the following commands to update, upgrade, and perform a distribution upgrade on your system:

```shell
sudo apt-get update -y
sudo apt-get upgrade -y
sudo apt-get dist-upgrade -y
```

The `update` command fetches the latest package information from the repositories, while the `upgrade` command installs newer versions of the packages already installed on your system. The `dist-upgrade` command handles dependencies and resolves conflicts during upgrades. The `-y` flag automatically confirms any prompts, streamlining the process.

### Allowing Port 22 Access

Port 22 is the default port for SSH connections, allowing you to securely access your server. To ensure that you don't lock yourself out of your server on subsequent logins, you need to allow traffic on port 22.

Enter the following command to enable SSH access:

```shell
iptables -A INPUT -p tcp --dport 22 -j ACCEPT
```

With this rule in place, you're granting permission for SSH traffic to enter through port 22, which means you can log in without any obstacles.

By updating your system, performing upgrades, and allowing SSH access on port 22, you're creating a solid foundation for the CS 1.6 server setup that lies ahead. Now, as we move forward, you'll be equipped with a pristine environment ready to embrace the excitement of gaming. In the next sections, we'll dive deeper into the heart of the CS 1.6 setup process and explore the installation of essential components. Get ready to turn your VPS into a gaming powerhouse!

### Step 4: Allowing Server Ports with UFW

Imagine ports as the doorways to your server – they determine what type of traffic is allowed in and out. In this step, we're going to ensure that the necessary port for your CS 1.6 server is open and ready to receive players. Think of it as inviting gamers into your digital arena.

Previously, we used `iptables` to manage ports, but for simplicity's sake, we're introducing `ufw` (Uncomplicated Firewall), a user-friendly alternative. We're going to allow port 27015 this time, which is a common choice for CS 1.6 servers.

### Installing and Enabling UFW

First things first, let's install `ufw` and enable it to ensure it starts up automatically after system boot:

```shell
sudo apt-get install ufw -y
sudo ufw enable
```

### Allowing Port 27015

Now, let's grant access to port 27015, which is a common UDP port used by CS 1.6 servers:

```shell
sudo ufw allow 27015/udp
```

By allowing UDP traffic on port 27015, you're enabling your server to communicate with players efficiently and effectively. This step is essential for creating a smooth gaming experience.

### Step 5: Installing SteamCMD

SteamCMD is your key to unlocking the world of game server management. It allows you to download and update game server files from Steam's content distribution system. In this step, we'll install SteamCMD, which is essential for setting up and maintaining your CS 1.6 server.

To get started, follow these instructions (assuming you're using Ubuntu):

1. **Adding the Multiverse Repository**:
   
   Multiverse is an Ubuntu repository that contains software packages that aren't officially supported by Canonical but are still maintained by the community. To add the Multiverse repository, run:

   ```shell
   sudo add-apt-repository multiverse
   ```

2. **Installing Required Packages**:
   
   Before installing SteamCMD, let's make sure your system is ready. Install the necessary packages using the following commands:

   ```shell
   sudo apt install software-properties-common -y
   sudo dpkg --add-architecture i386
   sudo apt update -y
   ```

3. **Installing SteamCMD**:
   
   With the prerequisites in place, you're ready to install SteamCMD:

   ```shell
   sudo apt install lib32gcc-s1 -y
   sudo apt install steamcmd -y
   ```

With SteamCMD installed, you now have a powerful tool at your disposal that will make managing your CS 1.6 server smoother and more efficient. You're moving closer to unleashing the gaming experience for yourself and others. In the upcoming steps, we'll delve into downloading and configuring the necessary server files to set the stage for Counter-Strike action.

### Step 6: Installing Game Server Required Files

Your CS 1.6 server needs the necessary game files to function properly. In this step, we'll use SteamCMD to download and install these files.

1. **Open SteamCMD**:
   
   Launch SteamCMD by entering the following command in your terminal:

   ```shell
   steamcmd
   ```

2. **Login with anonymous**:
   
   Once SteamCMD is running, log in as an anonymous user with:

   ```shell
   login anonymous
   ```

3. **Install CS 1.6 Server Files**:
   
   Now that you're logged in, it's time to download and install the CS 1.6 server files. Enter the following commands:

   ```shell
   app_update 90 validate
   ```

   The number "90" corresponds to the CS 1.6 game ID. The "validate" parameter ensures that the files are validated and correctly installed. 
   >Notes: You might encounter an error the first time you try to run `app_update 90 validate`. Don't worry, this is a common issue with SteamCMD. Simply try the `app_update 90 validate` command again, and it should work fine.

4. **Exit SteamCMD**:
   
   Once the server files are downloaded and installed, you can exit SteamCMD by typing:

   ```shell
   exit
   ```

With the game server files in place, you're well on your way to creating your very own CS 1.6 server. In the following steps, we'll set up the necessary configurations and plugins to transform your server into a bustling zombie apocalypse!

### Step 7: Testing the Server

Congratulations, you've reached a significant milestone – your CS 1.6 server is set up with the basic game files. However, before you can dive into the action, you need to start the server and ensure everything is running as expected. Let's put your server to the test!

1. **Navigate to the Server Directory**:
   
   The CS 1.6 server files are located in the following directory:

   ```
   ~/.steam/steamapps/common/Half-Life/
   ```

   Use the `cd` command to navigate to this directory:

   ```shell
   cd ~/.steam/steamapps/common/Half-Life/
   ```

2. **Start the Server**:
   
   With the server files directory as your current location, use the following command to start the CS 1.6 server:

   ```shell
   screen -dmS hlds ./hlds_run -game cstrike +map de_dust2 -port 27015 +maxplayers 32 -insecure
   ```

   Let's break down the components of this command:

   - `-dmS hlds`: This portion of the command sets up a detached screen session named "hlds" for the server process.
   - `./hlds_run`: This command starts the server program.
   - `-game cstrike`: Specifies that the game being run is Counter-Strike 1.6.
   - `+map de_dust2`: Specifies the initial map to load, in this case, "de_dust2."
   - `-port 27015`: Sets the server's port to 27015.
   - `+maxplayers 32`: Limits the maximum number of players in a game to 32.
   - `-insecure`: Disables Valve Anti-Cheat (VAC) for now.

3. **Access Your Server**:

   Once the server is running, it's time to see the fruits of your labor. Launch Counter-Strike 1.6 on your client machine. In the game's console, press the tilde key (`~`) to open the console and enter the following command:

   ```shell
   connect <your_server_ip>:27015
   ```

   Replace `<your_server_ip>` with the actual IP address of your VPS.

   Alternatively, you can search for your server in the server list within the game and connect from there.

4. **Exiting and Managing the Server**:

   To leave the server running in the background while you exit the terminal, press `Ctrl+A` followed by `Ctrl+D`. This will detach the screen session without stopping the server.

   If you want to return to the server console at any time, use the following command:

   ```shell
   screen -r hlds
   ```

With your server up and running, you've accomplished a major part of the setup process. In the next steps, we'll dive deeper into configuring your server and adding plugins to make it the ultimate CS 1.6 Zombie Plague experience!

### Step 8: Download Required Files for AMXXModX and Metamod

To enhance your CS 1.6 server with additional features and functionalities, you'll need to install AMXXModX (Advanced Multi-Mod X) and Metamod. These plugins will allow you to create and add custom game modes, plugins, and more. Let's get started by downloading the necessary files

>Notes: Just follow me here, because AMXX are almost never updated. As for the explanation... it's a pity because no one plays 1.6, and the most stable version is 1.82...

1. **Download AMXXModX Base Files**:

   Use the `wget` command to download the base files of AMXXModX version 1.8.2:

   ```shell
   wget https://www.amxmodx.org/release/amxmodx-1.8.2-base-linux.tar.gz
   ```

2. **Download AMXXModX Addon Files**:

   Similarly, download the addon files for AMXXModX version 1.8.2. This step is important for CS 1.6 servers as it provides compatibility with Counter-Strike:

   ```shell
   wget https://www.amxmodx.org/release/amxmodx-1.8.2-cstrike-linux.tar.gz
   ```

3. **Download Metamod Files**:

   Next, let's download Metamod version 1.21.1, which acts as a plugin management system for Half-Life mods like AMXXModX:

   ```shell
   wget https://www.amxmodx.org/release/metamod-1.21.1-am.zip
   ```

These files will allow you to expand the capabilities of your CS 1.6 server and create unique gameplay experiences. Make sure you have these files ready as we'll proceed to extract and configure them in the following steps.

### Step 9: Extract and Install AMXXModX and Metamod Files

Now that you have downloaded the necessary files for AMXXModX and Metamod, let's proceed to extract and install them. Follow these steps carefully to ensure a successful installation:

1. **Extract AMXXModX Base Files**:

   First, extract the base files of AMXXModX using the following command:

   ```shell
   tar zxvf amxmodx-1.8.2-base-linux.tar.gz
   ```

2. **Extract AMXXModX Addon Files**:

   Next, extract the addon files for AMXXModX that are specific to Counter-Strike using the command:

   ```shell
   tar zxvf amxmodx-1.8.2-cstrike-linux.tar.gz
   ```

3. **Extract Metamod Files**:

   Unzip the Metamod files using the command:

   ```shell
   unzip metamod-1.21.1-am.zip
   ```

4. **Install AMXXModX**:

   After extracting the files, navigate to the AMXXModX `addons` directory that was created. Use the `cp` command to copy the extracted `addons` directory into the appropriate location for your CS 1.6 server:

   ```shell
   cp -r addons/ ~/.steam/steamapps/common/Half-Life/cstrike/
   ```

These steps ensure that AMXXModX and Metamod are correctly installed and ready to be used with your CS 1.6 server.

### Step 10: Edit and Create Configuration Files

Configuring your CS 1.6 server involves modifying and creating certain files to ensure the smooth operation of the server with the installed plugins. Follow these steps to make the necessary changes and create new configuration files:

1. **Modify liblist.gam**:

   The `liblist.gam` file contains crucial information about the game's libraries. Open the file using the `nano` text editor:

   ```shell
   nano ~/.steam/steamapps/common/Half-Life/cstrike/liblist.gam
   ```

   Inside the file, locate the line that starts with `gamedll_linux` and change it to:

   ```shell
   gamedll_linux "addons/metamod/dlls/metamod.so"
   ```

   After making the change, press `Ctrl + S` to save and then `Ctrl + X` to exit the `nano` editor.

2. **Create plugins.ini**:

   Next, create a new configuration file called `plugins.ini` under the `addons/metamod` directory:

   ```shell
   nano ~/.steam/steamapps/common/Half-Life/cstrike/addons/metamod/plugins.ini
   ```

   In the newly created file, add the following line:

   ```shell
   linux addons/amxmodx/dlls/amxmodx_mm_i386.so
   ```

   Once again, press `Ctrl + S` to save and then `Ctrl + X` to exit the `nano` editor.

By making these changes and creating the necessary configuration files, you ensure that AMXXModX and Metamod are correctly integrated into your CS 1.6 server, allowing you to utilize their features and plugins for enhanced gameplay.

### Step 11: Testing Your Server (AMXX Installation Verification)

Before proceeding to the next step of installing Zombie Plague, let's ensure that your game server is up and running with AMXX installed correctly.

1. Restart Your Server:
   Restart your game server using the `screen` command:

   ```shell
   screen -r hlds
   ```

   Press Ctrl+C to turn it off.

2. Start the Server:
   Navigate to the server directory:

   ```shell
   cd ~/.steam/steamapps/common/Half-Life/
   ```

   Initiate the server with the following command:

   ```shell
   screen -dmS hlds ./hlds_run -game cstrike +map de_dust2 -port 27015 +maxplayers 32 -insecure
   ```

3. Verify AMXX and Metamod:
   Access the server console:

   ```shell
   screen -r hlds
   ```

   Type the following commands to see if the plugins are properly loaded:

   ```shell
   meta list
   amxx list
   ```

   If the results display a list of plugins, you're on the right track.

With AMXX successfully installed and running, you're ready to move on to the exciting step of installing Zombie Plague! Let's get started.

### Step 12: Installing Zombie Plague Mod

Now, let's dive into the exciting process of installing the Zombie Plague mod for your CS 1.6 server. Follow these steps carefully:

1. **Obtain the Zombie Plague Mod:**
   Zombie Plague is a popular modification for CS 1.6 that adds a thrilling zombie apocalypse gameplay mode. You can find the mod files in the following links:

   - [Zombie Plague 2014 Version](https://forums.alliedmods.net/showthread.php?s=d63394212992e827c6577de504a895bc&t=164926)
   - [Zombie Plague 2008 Version](https://forums.alliedmods.net/showthread.php?s=d63394212992e827c6577de504a895bc&t=72505)

2. **Download the Files:**
   Use the `wget` command to download the mod files directly to your server. Run these commands to get the necessary resources and plugins:

   ```shell
   wget "https://forums.alliedmods.net/attachment.php?attachmentid=136034&d=1412085945" -O zp_resources.zip
   wget "https://forums.alliedmods.net/attachment.php?s=46bcb4236bef6c971e41f8e763a94c24&attachmentid=28817&d=1216059497" -O zp_plugins.zip
   ```

3. **Unzip the Files:**
   After downloading, unzip the resource and plugin files:

   ```shell
   unzip zp_resources.zip 
   unzip zp_plugins.zip
   ```

   Make sure you have the resource and plugin files properly extracted.

4. **Copy Files to `cstrike/` Directory:**
   Place all the extracted files into the `~/.steam/steamapps/common/Half-Life/cstrike` directory. Note that zip files and txt files won't affect the server, so you can copy them as well.

5. **Compile SMA Files:**
   Navigate to the scripting directory for AMX Mod X:

   ```shell
   cd ~/.steam/steamapps/common/Half-Life/cstrike/addons/amxmodx/scripting
   ```

   Run the compilation script:

   ```shell
   ./compile.sh
   ```

6. **Copy Compiled Plugin Files:**
   After compiling the SMA files, move to the `compiled` folder:

   ```shell
   cd ~/.steam/steamapps/common/Half-Life/cstrike/addons/amxmodx/scripting/compiled
   ```

   You'll find the compiled AMXX files here. Copy them to the plugins directory:

   ```shell
   cp *.amxx ~/.steam/steamapps/common/Half-Life/cstrike/addons/amxmodx/plugins
   ```

With these steps completed, you've successfully installed the Zombie Plague mod for your CS 1.6 server.

### Step 13: Testing your Server (Zombie Plague Installation Verification)

Let's verify the successful installation of the Zombie Plague mod on your CS 1.6 server. Follow these steps:

1. **Restart Your Server:**
   Restart your game server using the `screen` command:

   ```shell
   screen -r hlds
   ```

   Press Ctrl+C to turn it off.

2. **Start the Server with Zombie Plague Mod:**
   Navigate to the server directory:

   ```shell
   cd ~/.steam/steamapps/common/Half-Life/
   ```

   Start the server with the Zombie Plague mod using the following command:

   ```shell
   screen -dmS hlds ./hlds_run -game cstrike +map de_dust2 -port 27015 +maxplayers 32 -insecure
   ```

   Access the server console:

   ```shell
   screen -r hlds
   ```

   Temporarily exit the screen session:

   Press Ctrl+A, then press D

3. **Check if Zombie Plague Mod is Active:**
   Go back to your screen session:

   ```shell
   screen -r hlds
   ```

   Enter the following command to view the loaded plugins, which should now include Zombie Plague:

   ```shell
   amxx list
   ```

4. **Join Your Zombie Plague Server:**
   Launch Counter-Strike 1.6 and open the console by pressing the ` key:

   ```shell
   connect your_server_ip:port
   ```

   Alternatively, use the GUI method to join by adding your server's IP to the server list.

By completing these steps, you've successfully installed and verified the Zombie Plague mod on your CS 1.6 server. Enjoy the excitement of the zombie apocalypse gameplay mode!

## References

- [SteamCMD](https://developer.valvesoftware.com/wiki/SteamCMD#Debian-Based_Distributions_.28Ubuntu.2C_Mint.2C_etc..29)
- [Zombie Plague Mod 5.0](https://forums.alliedmods.net/showthread.php?s=d63394212992e827c6577de504a895bc&t=72505)
- [ZP 5.0 Betas/Updates](https://forums.alliedmods.net/showthread.php?s=d63394212992e827c6577de504a895bc&t=164926)